## Prompt 5: How can we avoid ‘tokenism’ in our  writing and reporting?
Moderator: Kendall Powell ([\@KendallSciWrite](https://twitter.com/KendallSciWri))

**Kendall Powell’s (freelancer) take on tokenism:**
Plenary was amazing. One definition of tokenism in journalism would be: The practice of including diverse voices only to prevent criticism, boost numbers of diverse sources, or give the appearance of fairness and balance in your reporting.
  
Becomes very obvious to everyone, including the sources themselves and your editors and your readers, if you’re only calling to pop one TK-type-of person into the story.
  
Trying to find diverse sources who really bring an expert, unique opinion or valuable perspective on a story.
  
Two methods (not always successful):

1. Cultivate go-to sources for fave topics who also bring diverse perspectives  
2. Ask sources to point toward other experts + ask for Women, BIPOC, LGBTQ. Also ask the PIOs. They know who interviews well. Use your PIO resources!  
  
A couple of resources for finding diverse sources:  
[500womenscientists.org](https://500womenscientists.org/)  
[500queerscientists.com](https://500queerscientists.com/)  
  
Both of these have “search” functions that journalists can use to identify scientists with particular research interests AND in particular geographies.
  
DO make sources feel valued and included, not “othered”  
DON’T ask sources to speak for their entire demographic or group (unless they are an expert in *that*)  
DO ask for their own personal and/or professional take on the subject just like you would for any source  
  
  
Karen McNulty Walsh (a PIO at Brookhaven): Limited to the number of scientists at her institution. Strive for diversity, but often feels like she’s pushing to include people in stories + Photos. People who are very qualified on some topics, but not all topics. To highlight BIPOC work. Is that tokenism?  Karen thinks it’s best to promote the BIPOC when they can.
Megan (also a PIO) runs into this problem, too.

^^Diana’s opinion on the above: It depends. But it’s good to highlight BIPOC scientists. Maybe turn to the grad students and postdocs more often? Seek out the first authors on the studies! They’re experts, too.  

* ^^Great point! Especially because professors, especially tenured or heads of labs get credit for work that has been done by students and postdocs.  
    * ^^Agreed! Also - PIOs should take opportunities to provide media training and encouragement to early career scientists who may be more diverse as a group; that can help them feel prepared and comfortable to jump into it.  

Tina Saey (reporter): Developing a diverse source list. She draws heavily from awards that go to scientists who are from diverse backgrounds + taking a look at conference speaker lists (those have headshots) and lots of conferences are pushing to include diverse people. And their expertise immediately pops out based on their talk’s title.  
→ Tina says here’s an example of the awards list she looks at: [https://www.hhmi.org/programs/hanna-h-gray-fellows-program#Fellows](https://www.hhmi.org/programs/hanna-h-gray-fellows-program#Fellows)   

Carolyn Collins Petersen (freelancer + event organizer): Some scientists refuse to be on ‘manels’ until you get more women on the panel. Ask around with the nearby institutions.  

Matthew Francis (freelancer) uses Twitter to find diverse sources because scientists on Twitter tend to be more diverse but also because their threads allow you to “see” their voice and stances on things. He also uses a spreadsheet of sources in stories to keep himself accountable. If you are not reaching 50% women or whatever other target, then you aren’t there yet.

Matthew also brought up using the Finkbeiner Test when deciding about what details to provide about a scientist’s life or background within an article. The test was originally about writing about women, but also stands for other underrepresented groups in science. The rule is generally if you wouldn’t include those details about skin color, background, LGBTQ status about a majority scientist, then you also shouldn’t include them for an underrepresented scientist.

Finkbeiner Test essay: [https://www.lastwordonnothing.com/2017/10/26/the-finkbeiner-test-a-tool-for-writing-about-women-in-their-professions/](https://www.lastwordonnothing.com/2017/10/26/the-finkbeiner-test-a-tool-for-writing-about-women-in-their-professions/) 


Dana Smith (senior writer) shared that she always looks to the first authors on papers because they are often younger and more diverse and suggests that PIOs also put those early career researchers forward for stories.  She also looks for the same criteria that marks any source as an expert--have they written a book on the subject? Etc.


What to do when you encounter a reluctant source/or one who points you back to other majority voices?  

* Jennifer Huber (freelancer) says depending on your relationship with the source, and if not too awkward,  it’s okay to be personal and honest with sources, saying “I’ve already got too many white men in my story…” or “But I’d really like to hear from YOU on this.”  
* Karen McNulty Walsh (PIO at Brookhaven) used similar tactics to convince a woman researcher at her institution to be part of a brochure on that field. The researchers didn’t want to be the “token woman” but Karen convinced her that she is a leader in her field and deserved to be highlighted, plus if she didn’t participate, then there would be no women featured.  


Marisol Martinez (PIO at JHU) says that PIOs really appreciate it when reporters are very specific in their requests about what type of source they are looking for. Don’t be shy about asking for a woman of color who could comment on TK.

Dawn Levy (PIO at ORNL) agrees. Half of ORNL’s researchers are from other countries and there are a lot of international projects and teamwork. PIOs have gotten to know their people and they want to help you find those diverse sources.

Robin Kazmier (editor, PBS Nova) emphasized reassuring sources that you are seeking their opinion because of their experience and expertise, show them in your email or opening conversation that you’ve done your homework and you know they have a valuable, expert opinion here.

****

Brittany Uhlorn (science writer at University of Arizona): Instead of seeking a diverse voice/perspective for just one quote or idea, consider writing the narrative around them. This might only be possible in the case of a longer feature, but if you can humanize the story and write more about that diverse person’s background, it might seem less like you are choosing them because they “check a box” of the diversity and more because they have a unique perspective to tell. Also, you can let the person know you sought them out because you were looking for someone with a different “lived experience”.


Carolyn Collins Petersen (producer, Loch Ness Productions): I organize science panels for local events. I’m a science writer and the event organizers have made me part of their organization team and I had a scientist tell ME that he would not speak on my panel until I had at least 50 percent female, or further diversity, on the panel. It was a good push for me to look beyond my usual sources of speakers.  


I come from a unique background because I am new to science writing but have worked in science education for several years. One way to avoid tokenism in a future, ideal world is to expand young people’s idea of what it means to be a scientist, so I started a nonprofit enrichment program that brings scientists in to speak to students. Like Matthew, I rely on spreadsheets to keep track of my search for diverse scientists! I also use photos on department websites and Twitter to help with my outreach. The Twitter account [\@BlackAFinStem](https://twitter.com/Blackafinstem) is a great account, for example.

Also, when creating multimedia journalism pieces, it is really important to use a diversity of voice-over/narrators/interviewees.  In the same vein of “If she can see it, she can be it”, I want to make sure “if she can hear her own voice in a piece, she can BE it”.  
→ Yeah, make sure they know which “code” to “code switch into for the V/O” ? Or at least have a dialogue about that, because the default “scientist speak” is very much a white dialect?  

* Good point. I usually ask people to give it very “conversationally” and we rehearse a bit ahead of time so that I can head some of that off at the pass.

Make sure to highlight diverse voices throughout the year, not just during particular celebration months.  
* ^^Yes! It is exhausting as an LGBT scientist, to always be sought out during June (Pride month).   

Would it help for institutions to have photos of scientists in their directories or does that encourage tokenism?

* ^^Good question. I think that because the Twitter lists of scientists of color are somewhat limited, a lot of times the same few scientists get asked for quotes over and over?
    * ^^I would say that yes, it would help to have photos in directories. Everytime I start to prepare for interviews, I am doing Google searches for scientists, which usually includes their images and I can use that to factor into my searches for a broad range of voices on topics.  It’s obviously not the SOLE way of including diverse voices, but another piece of data.
    * --I love when departmental websites have photos on their faculty list page with at least keywords as to their expertise--it makes it really easy to go from topic to relevant source.


When is it important to bring in diverse sources?  
→ When an ecology story is set in another country, definitely include people from that country! (i.e. If you’re writing re: lemurs, def try to include Malagasy scientists as sources)

A few good ways to find diverse scientists/avoid tokenism:  

* Use Twitter lists, find the relevant hashtags, contact professional orgs like SACNAS or Society of Black Archaeologists to ask for a referral to experts in a specific area. If you need help, especially with Twitter lists, let me know! Robin Kazmier (\@rokazmier)  
* Find searchable databases like [Database of Diverse Databases](https://editorsofcolor.com/diverse-databases/).  
* Use google site search to search databases even if they aren’t readily searchable.    
* Be open to interviewing grad students if their experience is more aligned with the topic  
* Include multiple underrepresented voices in stories; normalize diverse perspectives  
* Use these strategies to get in the habit of having multiple underrepresented sources in every single story. Once you know where to look it’s not that hard to find people.  
* Reach out to orgs to ask if they have a list of members willing to talk to the press.  
* As an editor, make it clear to reporters that diversity is a must have, not a “nice to have” - support them in finding those sources  
* If there are absolutely no underrepresented people that fit into your story, question why you’re telling that story.  
