## Prompt 6: How can PIOs and journalists work together to ensure more representative reporting?
Moderator: Kelly Tyrrell ([\@kellyperil](https://twitter.com/kellyperil))

Talk to graduate students and postdocs and not just corresponding authors; these are often the first authors. PIOs can also include diverse sources in their own stories.

Many lead PIs are excited to include younger faculty, students, postdocs. PIOs can navigate these conversations at the front end and quote these scientists, too, so they’re more obvious sources for reporters to talk to.

Younger experts/early-career faculty are sometimes less willing to go out on a limb when speaking with reporters. This can require some work by PIOs to train these experts.

PIOs can push back on PIs and ask/require junior scientists get involved.

Consider storytelling centered exclusively around junior researchers.

_Go deeper into the author list and ask the lead/PI: Is there someone else I can talk to about this on the paper? “Are there any women who are studying this?”_

Institutions should make efforts to find more diverse sources - reporters should ask for diverse sources whenever possible, and upfront. Challenge is that reporters are on deadline and want timely response and white men/usual go-tos are more often first to respond.

What about tokenizing experts? Might end up over-relying on some experts to achieve diversity. Can you ask for others in their field or in their realm who might be able to share the burden? Experts of color are often asked to take on more responsibility and service than their white counterparts.

If an expert does not have an obvious or ethnic name, is it clear they’re “diverse”? Is it important to represent diversity in some way? Making the effort to find a diverse source brings their perspective, whether or not you “know” they are diverse. Their perspective/quote in a news story can lead to profiles or other downstream outcomes.

For example: profiles, or when writing for kids/students - some classrooms look up the scientists and the research.

Consider linking back to the individual’s page so you don’t have to divulge details that may be inappropriate to call out.

How do you navigate calling out diversity? It’s best to avoid calling out what makes someone diverse. By pointing that out it “de-normalizes” their perspective in a sense, because you’re calling something out (say, that they are a Black scientist) that you wouldn’t for someone who isn’t “diverse (a white scientist).

Highlight diversity of perspectives, broaden the point-of-view of your stories. Our work shouldn’t involve checkboxes or categories. It may be that a white man may offer a different socieconomic perspective. To avoid tokenism, at the very start of a story, examine the questions you are asking and see what questions you could be asking. When you choose a source, really be intentional about the value and expertise that they bring to the table. That will translate to the source as well in your conversations.

PIOs can choose to highlight people through Q&As and profiles. We can choose stories from the outset that represent diverse perspectives.  

It’s difficult in some fields to do this (for ex: physics, engineering) when they also lack diversity, especially in higher ed.

Might be worth looking at institutions with more diverse faculty for experts. Ask experts to speak with their grad students or postdocs.

**Images in storytelling:**  

* TONL specializes in diverse stock photography: [https://tonl.co/](https://tonl.co/)   
* Getty Image, which allows you to filter by race/ethnicity - but it doesn't always return great results.  
* a new resource of free images of Black professionals: [https://www.blackillustrations.com/illustrations/the-office-hustle-illustration-pack-official](https://www.blackillustrations.com/illustrations/the-office-hustle-illustration-pack-official)  