## Prompt 7: How can science writers better cover social justice issues?
Moderator: Wudan Yan ([\@wudanyan](https://twitter.com/wudanyan))

PIO from JHU says that even when she publishes stories about health inequities, or POC communities, she finds that journalists don’t like to cover these stories. She keeps pushing it because it’s important, but gets severely less pick-up. 

Others chimed in that it’s possible writers don’t know how to tackle these stories with clarity / nuance, and they risk saying something insensitive or off-base during the interview. Someone said that these stories seem touchier -- “how can I convey this information without being offensive, or should I just not cover it at all?” 

When covering people affected by social justice issues: It’s challenging to get people to find people to speak on the record without being triggered. 

Sometimes folks want to stay anonymous, but anonymous sources may impact credibility of a piece.

It may be helpful to look at these issues from a sociological point of view: why is this [injustice] happening? Why are people behaving this way -- to put events in context. 

Freelancers writing about social justice issues are not always confident that their editors are trained to recognize the sensitivity that social justice stories may need during editing. 

TLDR: Would be helpful to have resources on NASW, for instance, that provides guidance on how to cover social justice issues as a writer, and how to navigate editing social justice stories as an editor. 

*****

**From chat:**
**cassandrawillyard**: I’ve used anonymous sources or only first names, but it’s tricky and standards do depend on the outlet.

**Wudan Yan (she/her)**: I’m striking out! B/c there are so many, but there’s a lot of good stuff here: [https://dartcenter.org/resources?page=1&topic%5B0%5D=76](https://dartcenter.org/resources?page=1&topic%5B0%5D=76) 

**Spoorthy**: Picture a scientist is so moving! Very thought provoking! Great job at that!

**WaunShae Blount**: I agree Spoorthy!

**Spoorthy**: Thanks everyone on your inputs to my thoughts!

**Lisa Munoz**: Thank you! I will tell the film team it came up and they will be thrilledWe are working to bring the film to more NASW members too

**Calley Jones**: Is there a strong role for publications which are specifically geared for the intersection between science and social issues (i.e. Undark)? Does this idea promote stories that reflect on these topics, or does it sequester them to their own areas?

**Brandie Jefferson (she|her)**: did I miss the google doc link?

**Spoorthy**: Please do \@Lisa, I watched it last week as part of UKSCJ

**Brandie Jefferson (she|her)**: Oh wow, I didn’t even know that was a thingQ

**Meg Evans Smith**: me neither — that’s pretty cool.

**Brandie Jefferson (she|her)**: omg

**Sally James**: My black-owned nonprofit has great editors, but they don't have budget for extensive editing.  Plus, in cultural terms, I think the sensitivity does not cross all boundaries, so different sensitivity for Latinx than Black?

**Natalie Rogers**: Yeah that’s a big yikes

**WaunShae Blount**: Lisa- That's awesome! Such a touching and striking view of women in science and how we may be viewed. I appreciate the dialogue the documentary promoted and how open the speakers were.

**Melissa Hellman (she/her)**: I think one big step is knowing what you don’t know, and when you need to hire a sensitivity reader (or possibly revise your institution’s style guide).

**Sally James**: hate idea that the burden would fall on people of color to volunteer for others

**Meg Evans Smith**: Is it naive to suggest that some sort of living style manual could help out with sensitivity in different kinds of writing?

**cassandrawillyard**: I think of a sensitivity reader as someone who knows all the latest style guide updates and can turn a careful and thoughtful eye to your copy and see places that might be problematic.

**Natalie Rogers**: I like that idea Meg but it presents the same problem—who would do that?

**Meg Evans Smith**: true.

**cassandrawillyard**: But then there are people who prefer “autistic person” so it’s complex.

**Brandie Jefferson (she|her)**: Exactly Cassaundra, that’s what I’m wondering abouyt

**Melissa Hellman (she/her)**: I’d argue that you need to have multiple sensitivity readers available. For instance, I wouldn’t necessarily expect a Black sensitivity reader to be the authority on LGBTQ+ issues and language.

**Wudan Yan (she/her)**: yeah definitely cassandra!

**Giuliana Viglione**: Yep +1 to Cassandra. I’ve had sub-editors change “disabled scientist” to “scientist with disabilities” when the former was direct from the scientist I interviewed